Assignment 1 : Implement multi-threaded client/server Process communication using RMI.  

 

Terminal Set up : 

1. Open terminal and check java version is 21 : javac --version 
2. Run : sudo update- -alternative - -config java → then select option of java of 21 version using 0,1or 2 
depends 
3. Run : sudo update- -alternative - -config javac → then select option of java of 21 version using 0,1or 2 
depends 
4. Run : sudo apt update 
5. Then follow below steps for program 

6. Create Files  

Create 4 Java files:  

• Hello.java   

• HelloImpl.java   

• Server.java   

• Client.java  

7. Steps for terminal   

Step 1: Open terminal and create new folder   

cd Desktop 
mkdir RMI cd 
RMI  

Step 2 : Create 4 files  touch Hello.java HelloImpl.java 

Server.java Client.java  

Step 3: Compiles all files  

Compile Java Files  javac *.java  

Step 4:  Run Server  

Open Terminal 1:  java Server  

Step 5: Run Client  

Open Terminal 2: cd 

Desktop/RMI   java Client  



1. Check Java Installation  

Open terminal and type: 

java --version and javac 

--version  
  First Check This and then create file  

If Java is installed, you will see version output like:  Viva Questions & Answers for RMI Assignment  

openjdk 17  1. What is Distributed System?  

2. If Java is NOT Installed  
A distributed system is a collection of multiple computers 

Install Java JDK using:  that communicate and work together as a single system.  

sudo apt update  
sudo apt install default-jdk -y  

3. Verify Installation java --version  

javac –version                                                                                

  

2. What is RMI in Java?  

RMI stands for Remote Method Invocation.  
It allows a Java program to call methods of an object located on another machine.  

  

3. What is the use of RMI?  

RMI is used for communication between client and server applications in distributed systems.  

  

4. What are the main components of RMI?  

• Remote Interface   

• Remote Object (Implementation Class)   

• Server   

• Client   

• RMI Registry   

  

5. What is a Remote Interface?  

A remote interface defines methods that can be called remotely by the client.  

Example:  

public interface Hello extends Remote  

  

6. Why do we extend Remote interface?  

To make methods accessible remotely.  

  



7. Why is RemoteException used?  

It handles communication/network-related errors during remote method calls.  

  

8. What is UnicastRemoteObject?  

It is a class used to export a remote object so that it can receive incoming remote calls.  

  
9. What is RMI Registry?  

RMI Registry stores remote objects with names so clients can find them.  

Default port:  

1099  

  

10. What does rebind() do?  

It binds or registers the remote object with the RMI registry.  

Example:  

reg.rebind("HelloService", obj);  

  

11. What does lookup() do?  

Client uses lookup() to search and access the remote object from registry.  

  

12. Why multi-threading is used in this assignment?  

Multi-threading allows multiple clients to communicate with the server simultaneously.  

  

13. What is a Thread?  

A thread is a lightweight process used for parallel execution.  

  

14. Which class is used for multi-threading in your code?  

class ClientThread extends Thread  

  

15. What is the role of server in RMI?  

The server creates and registers remote objects for clients.  

  

16. What is the role of client in RMI?  

The client accesses remote objects and invokes methods remotely.  

  



17. Which protocol is used in RMI?  

TCP/IP protocol is used internally.  

  

18. Difference between RMI and Socket Programming?  

RMI  Socket  

High-level communication Low-level communication  

Supports remote methods Supports data transfer only  

Easier in Java  More coding required  

  

19. Advantages of RMI  

• Easy distributed communication   

• Object-oriented approach   

• Supports multi-threading   

• Secure and scalable   

  

20. Disadvantages of RMI  

• Java dependent   

• Slower than local calls   

• Requires network connectivity   

  

21. What is the output of your assignment?  

Server handles multiple client requests and returns messages like:  

Hello Client-1 from Server  

  

22. What happens if server is not running?  

Client gets connection error because remote object is unavailable.  

  

23. Why synchronized method is used? public synchronized String message()  

It prevents multiple threads from accessing the method at the same time.  

  

24. What is the difference between process and thread?  

Process  Thread  

Heavyweight  Lightweight  



Separate memory Shared memory  

Process  Thread  

Slower  Faster  

  

25. Real-life examples of Distributed Systems  

• Google Search Engine   

• Banking Systems   

• Cloud Computing   

• Online Games   

• ATM Network