Assignment 6: Implement Bully and Ring algorithm for leader election.  

  

Bully Algorithm Steps (Java) 
Step 1: Open VS Code 
Install Java Extension Pack. 

 
Step 2: Create Java File 
Create file: 
Bully.java 
Paste the Bully Algorithm Java code and save the file. 

 
Step 3: Compile Program 
Open terminal in VS Code and run: 
javac Bully.java 

 
Step 4: Run Program 
java Bully 

 
Ring Algorithm Steps (Java) 
Step 1: Create Java File 
Create file: 
Ring.java 
Paste the Ring Algorithm Java code and save the file. 

 
Step 2: Compile Program 
javac Ring.java 

 
Step 3: Run Program 
java Ring 

 
Viva Questions and Answers for Bully and Ring Algorithm 
1. What is Leader Election Algorithm? 
Leader election algorithm selects one process as coordinator/leader in a distributed system. 

 
2. What is a coordinator process? 
Coordinator is the process that controls and manages distributed activities. 

 
3. Why is leader election needed? 
Leader election is needed when the current coordinator fails or crashes. 

 
4. What is Bully Algorithm? 
Bully Algorithm elects the process with the highest process ID as coordinator. 



 
5. Why is it called Bully Algorithm? 
Because higher priority processes dominate lower priority processes. 

 
6. What is Ring Algorithm? 
Ring Algorithm arranges processes in a logical ring and passes election messages around the 
ring. 

 
7. Which process becomes leader in both algorithms? 
The process with the highest ID becomes leader. 

 
8. What happens if coordinator crashes? 
A new election process starts automatically. 

 
9. What is process ID? 
A unique number assigned to each process. 
Example: 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 

 
10. How does Bully Algorithm work? 

• Process detects coordinator failure  
• Sends election message to higher ID processes  
• Highest active process becomes coordinator  

 
11. How does Ring Algorithm work? 

• Election message circulates in ring structure  
• Highest process ID is selected as leader  

 
12. Which algorithm is faster? 
Bully Algorithm 

 
13. Which algorithm has less message overhead? 
Ring Algorithm 

 
14. What is message overhead? 
Number of messages exchanged during communication. 

 
15. What is distributed system? 
A distributed system is a group of computers/processes working together. 

 
16. Advantages of Bully Algorithm 

• Fast election  
• Easy implementation  



 
17. Disadvantages of Bully Algorithm 

• High message overhead  
• Not efficient for large systems  

 
18. Advantages of Ring Algorithm 

• Organized communication  
• Less message collision  

 
19. Disadvantages of Ring Algorithm 

• Slower than Bully Algorithm  
• Ring failure affects communication  

 
20. What is ring topology? 
A network structure where processes are connected in circular form. 

 
21. What is the output of your Bully Algorithm program? 
Coordinator Process is: 5 
New Coordinator is: 4 

 
22. What is the output of your Ring Algorithm program? 
Leader elected is: 4 

 
23. Which language is used in your program? 
Java 

 
24. Real-life applications of leader election 

• Distributed databases  
• Cloud computing  
• Distributed operating systems  
• Network servers  

 
25. Difference between Bully and Ring Algorithm 

Bully Algorithm Ring Algorithm 

Faster Slower 

More messages Fewer messages 

Direct election Ring communication